Welcome, everybody.
This is the last session of the day,
Daemon Wrangling with Launchd.
It's actually more generic than that.
We're going to be talking about
process management in general.
So first, what is launchd?
It's a rocket launcher.
Catapult, now.
It's a program to bootstrap
and manage other programs.
Now, I'd like to know,
before we get too deep into the session,
are you a developer or
are you a sysaadmin?
Let's do developers first.
All right.
Now let's do sysaadmins.
OK, so some of you do both daemon.
Awesome.
Like I said, we're going to cover
issues for both of you.
Launchd is both technologies.
Now, why did we do launchd?
Isn't this just another
reinvention of the wheel?
We had extensions.
We had Unix's etc.rc.d directory.
And we had Mac OS X startup items.
What are the advantages?
Well, I'd like to bring
Kevin Van Vechten on stage.
He worked on System Starter in
the Mac OS X days beforehand,
and he's had a lot of experience
with other operating systems.
He's my sounding board and my manager,
and he will explain the big picture.
Welcome, Kevin.
Thank you.
So remember about five years ago now,
there was a huge push for Mac OS X.
And Mac OS X was billed as
Unix for the rest of us.
It had a lot of great features.
It had a lot of things that made
it modern compared to Mac OS 9.
Virtualized address space,
protected memory,
inter-process communication between
those protected address spaces.
Preemptive multitasking was a big one.
And then, of course,
we pushed to a callback model
as opposed to a polling model.
for event delivery.
So it was, all these things are true and
it was a very modern system.
But a couple years ago,
I remember we had Year of the Notebook.
And an interesting thing happened
in the Year of the Notebook.
It really made it obvious that hardware
had become more modern than Unix was.
Hardware had a lot of hot
plug devices like FireWire,
USB, Ethernet, AirPort, even SATA.
So devices can come and go all the time.
You have dynamic protocols, DHCP, LDAP,
so a user group that might have been
defined a moment ago on your system,
could have just been revoked,
or perhaps somebody new was added.
Or your IP address could get changed
because your DHCP lease expired.
And these were things that Unix is not
accustomed to dealing with historically.
So there were a lot of historical
artifacts that were really no longer
applicable in this new world of
completely dynamic mobile computers.
Taking, for example,
the etsy.fs.tab file.
This is a text file that describes what
disks should be mounted on your system.
Well, this really doesn't make very much
sense when you have FireWire disks
and USB disks that can be plugged
and unplugged at a moment's notice.
Applications like the Finder, the system,
they really need to adapt dynamically
to look for files that are on
these disks when they appear and
to gracefully forget about these
files when the disks disappear.
Or ask the user to reattach a disk that
was attached not a moment ago so you can
finish doing whatever you needed to do.
So if fstab wasn't really
applicable in this new world,
is etcrc any different?
I mean,
this is a script that choreographed
the startup of the system.
But if disks come and go, well,
you can't really assume that
they're going to be the same
disks there when you start up.
Then 10 minutes later,
why assume that they're
there at startup at all?
And another big difference with
Mac OS X is unlike other Unix systems,
there really isn't a dedicated system
administrator for most Mac OS X systems.
Most Mac OS X systems are
used by a single user,
no administrator, really.
There's nobody who can go in
and edit etcrc to adapt to
whatever needs to be done.
It's something that we
need to do dynamically.
So launchd comes into the picture.
What launchd provides is an unambiguous
way to declare dependencies.
It's based on the actual
primitives that processes need
to communicate with one another.
If there's a dependency
between two processes,
they must be doing something
that allows them to collaborate.
Maybe they're sending
information across a socket.
Maybe they're both looking for
the existence of a common file.
Maybe they're sending
Mach messages over Mach ports.
But the fundamental idea here is
it's not good enough to just say this
process depends on that other process.
You really need to think about why
does it depend on that process?
What is the OS?
What is the Mac OS 10's
best mechanism that's using?
What is the manifestation
of the dependency?
And if you can describe the
dependencies in those terms,
then they're not ambiguous and you
can be very certain about when that
dependency has been fulfilled or not.
In a sense,
launchd is really kind of like
a process factory for processes,
if you're used to
object-oriented programming.
You issue requests either by sending
data to a socket or creating a file,
and launchd will notice this
activity and then automatically
launch on demand a program for you.
It's a factory for these processes.
So this means that we can
now virtualize our processes.
You don't actually have to
have this MySQL daemon running
or the X11 server running.
You just have to have a socket
there that could be written to.
And as soon as an application
writes to it for the first time,
launchd can notice and launch
that application on demand.
This means that you're using
less resources at idle time.
And only when you're actually using
a service does it become available.
But it also means that you
don't have to worry about the
service not being available.
Because it's always there virtually.
It just may or not be backed by an
actual process at any given time.
In this respect,
launchd is really a process superclass.
It takes care of a lot of the things
that background processes need to do.
No longer do you need to daemonize.
It can take care of all the steps
of changing your standard out,
standard error, standard in.
And really,
you just go right out the gate
from the main function in your
program and you're ready to be run
as a background process and you've
been launched on demand by launchd.
And launchd manages all these processes.
It can keep them alive if that's
what you've requested to do,
so if your process exits,
maybe it'll get launched
again automatically.
Or maybe it's only supposed
to run once and exit,
and that's fine,
launchd won't run it again.
It's taken a very
central role in Mac OS X.
Launchd is not just a process
manager like iNetD or xInetD
for which it has compatibility,
but it's actually PID1 in Mac OS X.
We don't have init anymore.
Launchd has subsumed all
the functionality that init
provides on other Unix systems.
And now in Leopard,
we've really enhanced the integration so
much that there's at least 100 different
jobs in launchd for the different
services that the system provides.
Things like the
Windows server or SSH daemon,
that type of thing.
And we're growing this list every week.
More and more services within Apple are
being converted over to using launchd.
So it's becoming very
pervasive in the system,
and we think it really makes sense
for you to use launchd when deciding
how and when your applications
should be launched automatically.
So launchd is open source.
It does play a very
pivotal role in Mac OS X.
We want you to see how it works.
We want you to be very
familiar with launchd.
And we're also very pleased to
announce now that launchd is available
under the Apache 2.0 license.
And we would love to see launchd--
We would love to see launchd be
adopted by other operating systems,
whether it be FreeBSD or Linux or
anyone else who's interested.
And of course,
we would love to see standard system
daemons that are found on all these
various platforms adopt launchd
for their process management needs.
And there's a new project page,
launchd.macosforge.org.
There's a blog there.
That's where we'll be posting
links to updated sources to
launchd and news about launchd.
And hopefully,
if any other systems are interested,
that's where you can find resources
about porting it to other systems.
So again, why launchd?
Well, previously, OS designs were really
kind of a house of cards.
You were either relying
on handcrafted ordering.
So some administrator had
to think in their head,
OK, what's the order all these
things should happen,
encode that in a file.
And if anything changed,
you'd have to remember to go into
the file and edit it and update it.
And so that's a bit tedious.
It also means that if one step got wrong,
then that failure could cascade quickly,
and you might end up in a completely
different place than you wanted to be
just because you forgot about one step.
So Apple had some goals.
We needed resiliency.
We needed recovery from failure.
We needed to not rely on assumptions
about what the hardware would look like,
because with FireWire and
USB and 802.11 wireless,
we really don't have much we can assume.
Things can look very, very different from
one minute to the next.
So we're really encouraging a model
where applications are robust,
they respond to errors gracefully,
they try to perform some action.
And if it doesn't work at the time,
they have to deal with that.
And hopefully,
you can try again later and succeed.
Also, as I've mentioned before,
we really encourage a model of
using callbacks for notifications
of when services and events happen.
We really don't want polling
to occur on the system.
So, again, you may be thinking, well,
what was wrong with System Starter?
System Starter didn't require
you to edit a net CRC file,
and you could just
install your startup item,
and that worked, right?
Well, it kind of worked.
There were some problems with it, though.
One is that System Starter used what we
call explicit out-of-band dependencies.
There was a list of strings
in a startup item that said,
here's what I require,
and here's what I provide.
And System Starter would order
those in a reasonable fashion.
But this is error-prone,
because the dependency strings, well,
they could be overstated.
So, perhaps somebody in
their startup item says,
I depend on the network,
I depend on the LDAP server,
I depend on the X11 server.
And guess what?
They didn't really depend
on the LDAP server.
But it's listed there.
System Starter has no way to
know that that's a false entry.
So,
it'll affect the ordering of the items.
Sometimes dependencies were understated.
Sometimes somebody would say, well,
I depend on the web server.
And at that time, the web server also
depended on the network.
So, the network would be up when
the web server item launched,
and then eventually your
item would get launched,
and everything would be happy.
But if we ever changed that,
if we ever said, oh, well,
we can go ahead and launch the web
server before the network comes up,
because it'll be accessible
on the local host IP,
right?
Well, you don't have that network
dependency captured anymore.
So, maybe that's not really what
you wanted to have happen.
So,
assuming dependencies by virtue of other
dependencies is really error-prone,
and it really tied our hands in
changing what the startup items did,
because we didn't know what
parts of the startup item people
were really depending on or not.
And, believe it or not,
System Starter actually had
some pretty bad race conditions.
What do I mean by this?
Well, historically,
most Unix background processes called
the daemon call to background themselves.
If we show a little timeline,
this could cause a problem.
If you have System Starter running,
and you go ahead and
launch a startup item,
then the example daemon's
in its main routine.
And that is a child directly
of that startup item.
However,
if it goes ahead and calls daemon,
System Starter's waiting
for the child process.
But now the child process
is just about to exit,
and it's the daemon that's
going to continue living.
Which means, at the same time the
child starts running,
the parent reclaims the process.
And so now what you have is
System Starter possibly concurrently
spawning the next startup item,
at the same instant that the actual
previous startup item started running.
Which means the dependency
really wasn't fulfilled.
Now, through a bit of luck and the
fact that usually on Unix,
the child process is the
first one to get scheduled,
things tended to work,
but it really is coincidence
that things worked at all.
Launchd on the other hand,
doesn't want you to use daemon.
It'll launch your process,
it's already backgrounded,
all of the daemonization has
been taken care of for you.
So Launchd can keep track of
when your process is ready,
when your process is alive,
relaunch it if necessary.
It's much more explicit,
it's much more controlled.
So, like I said, these are possibly
running at the same time,
which was not necessarily
the results that you wanted.
So, I'll hand it back to Dave to
talk about the daemon.
about the details of using LaunchD.
All right, thank you, Kevin.
All right,
now to get into the meat of things.
I'm going to start with the big picture.
What are we going to cover?
For developers,
we're going to first talk about where
your code fits in to the system,
because you've got to start somewhere.
When does your code get involved?
How does your code resolve dependencies
at a real nitty gritty level?
And how does your code and your
daemon check in with launchd to
solve the other end of the equation?
For system administrators,
why launchd adoption is good for you?
Now fitting into Mac OS X.
We're cleaning the
OS up into basic layers.
We were a little bit
fast and loose before.
We're going to try and push people
into some very concrete layers.
These are the layers
you're familiar with today.
We kind of have per machine
things and per session things.
You might find Safari, iTunes,
System UI Server running in your session.
And you might find, you know, diskRBD,
kexD, configD running as a daemon.
These are pretty defined buckets, but,
you know, through code,
you can kind of blur the layers.
And we're trying to actually begin
to enforce them and make sure
people cleanly design their code.
We're also investigating in Leopard,
but it isn't there yet,
but we're investigating
it per user layer,
which you may see someday.
We expect things like iTunes agent,
iChat agent,
Spotlight plugins to live there.
Essentially, these programs would
transcend login sessions.
So, you know,
just because you've logged out
doesn't mean that some programs
running in the background changing
disk stuff and we need your plugins
to analyze them for Spotlight or,
you know, you might want to share your
iTunes songs after you log out.
These are all, you know,
ideas we're experimenting with,
but it's a layer that makes sense.
And we hope we can help
you fit into that someday.
Now, the relationship between the layers.
Peer-to-peer or downward
inter-process communication is
what we're encouraging to help
you create better design products.
What does that look like?
We have three basic layers.
Recession at the top,
per user and per machine.
So you have apps running at the top.
You might have agents running in the
middle and daemons running on the bottom.
And yeah, side to side, that's fine.
You're in the same layer.
Everybody's all friendly, buddy-buddy,
good stuff.
But what we only want to see
is downward communication.
You know,
an app can talk all the way to a daemon,
or it can talk to an agent,
and the agent can talk to a daemon.
The important part is it's down.
Well, why is that?
Why only downward?
Well, we have a machine-wide context.
There's one of those.
Uh-oh.
We have more than one user on the system,
possibly at the same time.
We can have Bob's background problems
and Sally's background programs.
There are many layers above a program.
Knowing which one to
talk to is a problem.
Whereas if you go downward,
it's implicit.
You only have one per user context.
You only have one machine-wide
context beneath you.
In fact, if we look,
we have GUI sessions,
we have command line sessions,
and we may have other
sessions in the future.
So trying to deal with the scenarios
where a new session is created
above you that you may have never
heard of might throw you for a loop.
And it's best if you can just push
as much code as possible up into the
top so everything becomes implicit.
If you need to draw UI,
have code running in a session.
If you don't, maybe move it down a level.
Exactly.
Downward IPC encourages good design.
So what are the purpose
of these containers?
The per session?
Thank you, interaction.
Or programs that need to
come and go with the session.
They just don't make sense otherwise.
The per user?
don't need UI at all.
And if you need to transcend
a log in or log out,
this is the perfect container for you.
But you're still running as
the user in the user's context.
A lot of things are still implicit
when it comes to permissions and
access control and access to resources.
And finally, per machine.
This is one thing I'd
really like to stress.
We're really trying to push people,
as they evolve their code bases,
to keep the minimal code
required to arbitrate or
share hardware in this layer.
If it's doing anything more,
consider moving it up a level.
This will be the best for security in
the long run for the product because
that's the most risky container of all.
So getting started.
All right, that's great and all that
there's this high level vision.
Let's get started.
We need to install a property
list describing our job
into the right location.
Well, which location?
If you went to the Unix talk before this,
you may have heard us talk about
the Next style directories.
One of them, for example, is /library.
That's a local machine configuration.
You can put per machine jobs
in library launch daemons.
You can also put per user jobs or
per session jobs in network library
if you want to put it across all
your machines out on the network.
And you can put it in the local
machine if you only want the agents
to apply to the users on that system.
Or as a user yourself,
you can give yourself per user or per
session agents that only apply to you.
Think like cron jobs and whatnot,
all these little jobs
that just apply to you.
You can put them in your
home directory and launch,
and it'll pick them up.
Well,
what does a property list look like?
It looks like this yummy XML goodness.
But we're not going to dwell
on that slide for a second.
The real meat of that is you
need three keys and three values.
You need a label,
which uniquely identifies the job
to launchd and a string that we can
actually print out on the command line.
And it's just better for everyone
if we can actually give it a name.
We have program arguments.
It's the pre-tokenized array of strings.
It corresponds exactly to
that second argument of main.
This trips people up occasionally.
So they might,
in one of the array arguments,
say dash c space some file,
not realizing it needs to be dash
c is one element in the array.
And then the actual next
argument is the next one.
So you've got to map how you
think about things in your head
as arguments to how they actually
come out in the argument vector.
And finally, on demand.
The most simplest case of
a launchd job just keeps a
program running all the time.
There's no on demand-ness to it.
So you need to actually
tell launchd that,
because the default is to
have jobs be on demand.
So set it to false.
Launchd goes, OK.
And just keeps the job alive as
long as it's loaded into launchd.
[Transcript missing]
Net dependencies.
Kevin talked about them
at a big picture level.
Let's talk about them at the low level.
Forget everything you
knew about Bootstrap.
System starter and all that?
No.
We're doing it differently.
Programmers work with contracts.
That's our bread and butter.
Contracts define expectations
and promises between the
producers and the consumers.
There are two kinds of
contracts when programming.
There's programmatic,
what most people are familiar with,
and it's every API you've ever used.
There's also data-driven.
There's a lot of data.
And all the P lists we're talking about,
that's the contract you have
with launchd about your job.
What you're doing is you're telling
launchd whatever you want about yourself,
be it the multitude of keys that
are available in the launchd P list,
or maybe what you're not.
Maybe you're going to let
launchd implicit some things.
So for example,
if you don't set standard out or
standard error in your P list,
you'll just inherit it from launchd.
Again, think object-oriented.
And that can be really powerful
if you're working with launchd.
You can you can do some
neat inheritance tricks.
But those are the two contracts
we're going to be dealing with.
And how do they pertain to dependencies?
For networking changes,
we'll tell you to use the
system configuration framework.
For disk changes,
the disk arbitration framework.
For device discovery,
the I/O Kit framework.
There's a pattern here.
Other changes require
other API frameworks.
APIs are in fact fluid.
Let's give an example.
Goes all the way back to the 1970s.
Get PWNAM.
Not a pretty name, but it works.
Takes a login name,
returns a structure representing
the account in a Unix system.
It previously read
ETSI password directly.
That's fine.
An API is allowed to do that.
That was the contract.
But later,
we changed it to talk to lookupd via IPC.
Okay, well,
how did we avoid a race between getpwnam
being called and lookupd vending
the backend information via IPC?
All right, time to rewind.
Back to the launchd plist.
If you notice here,
we've added something to
the job describing it.
Lookupd, in fact,
was implemented using Mach.
And we told launchd about it.
Hey, we vend a Mach service.
The name in the Mach namespace
is lookupdaemonv2.
And well,
because dictionaries are key value based,
we need some values,
so we stuck true in there.
But the important thing is this
ended up telling launchd to create
a Mach port that can be found.
So later, when
When getpwnam was implemented,
it went out,
found the communication for lookupd,
and started sending it a message.
It really didn't matter whether
lookupd was running or not.
The communication was prepped.
So what launchd promises you
in the race-free IPC setup?
We're going to make sure all
the communication handles are
set up before any program beyond
launchd itself starts running.
And the nice thing about that is
that when they do start running,
all the possible services that can be
vended on the system are all known.
All per-machine jobs will be
loaded before any of them start.
Again, for the per-user context,
per session, it's all the same.
We load the handles up,
then open the floodgates and
let program start running.
But we don't promise you some things.
We don't promise networking
interfaces are found.
We don't promise that auxiliary
file systems are mounted.
We don't even promise that
hardware is done being probed yet.
Any detail about the configuration
besides what's necessary to bootstrap
communication between processes,
we don't promise that.
So yeah,
talk amongst yourselves as processes,
have a blast,
but it's between you and the
various API frameworks to
negotiate your dependencies.
And best of all,
if you can make fewer assumptions,
this will all just work.
Now talking to launchd,
well how does that work?
We have some APIs.
They're pretty simple.
If you've used core
foundation or foundation,
things will look familiar.
We're dealing with boxed objects.
Here we're allocating a new
string into a boxed object
and then we're extracting it.
Real simple container APIs.
They're not meant to be high performance.
I wouldn't recommend actually writing
your app around these container APIs.
They're just meant for IPC with launchd.
So the other side of the XML contract
when it comes to these APIs,
you need to get your
IPC handles from launchd.
Well, how do you do that?
Again, we have this boxed objects.
We're going to allocate a string,
particularly known string.
And we're going to check in with launchd.
So hey, launchd, I want to check it.
That's what that launch message does.
It takes an arbitrary object graph in and
returns an arbitrary object graph back.
Here we're checking for failures.
If it actually doesn't return something,
the communication apparently
failed for something.
But part two,
checking for secondary failures.
We can actually extract
the type of the object.
In this case,
we're checking to see if it was an error.
Just because you could talk to launchd,
doesn't necessarily mean what
you asked it to do worked.
So here,
we're trying to see if there's an error.
We extract it.
You can review the slides later,
but the important part is there's
some sample code in launchd project.
You can see this in action.
Pass the error checking.
Let's actually see something interesting.
Here's how to iterate
results using the APIs.
We have a dictionary lookup,
much like you have in core
foundation and foundation.
We take the response.
Here we're looking to see if launchd
provided us an advisory timeout.
Again, we like launch on demand,
and the next bonus points, gravy,
extra credit, if you will,
is to actually idle exit
when you're not needed.
So here we can extract
an advisory idle timeout.
Don't have to,
but if that key exists and if we care,
we can use it.
The next thing that we're checking
for here is if any Mach services
are to be vended by this job.
The neat thing about this, too,
is you can actually compare your
own program's notion of what it
does versus what the plist said.
It allows for some interesting
potential for adding things after
the fact into the plist that the
original program wasn't expecting.
That can be to your advantage sometimes.
And then the next one we're
looking up are sockets.
And again, may or may not be there.
It's good to check.
But let's say you did get some sockets.
We've got to do something with the
result of that particular case.
Well, sockets come back as a dictionary,
and we want to iterate them.
You can provide a callback for
the dictionary iterate API.
It looks like this.
It's your standard iteration API.
You have the key.
You have the value.
And you have a little
cookie you can pass through.
Here we're just going to
print out the results.
And once you iterate the full
results coming back from launchd,
you will have the descriptors right
there as a part of your message payload.
And you can add that to your event
loop and carry on just as normal.
Now, we actually made a demo.
This is actually in the
stock Leopard system.
And with a small little tweak,
you can enable this.
But we made SSH agent launch on
demand within your GUI session.
That means every one of your
Leopard systems right now,
if you make the small
little config tweak,
can just type SSH add without any
prep work and have an SSH agent
launched for your session.
And that's really neat
because then all the GUI apps,
again through inheritance,
can get the SSH agent values from it.
So if we can switch to the demo machine,
I'll show how this works.
So we made a small tweak.
Essentially, we did this,
sudo touch var db use ls.
This enables some code that
wasn't quite ready for WWDC,
but it's where we're trending in the OS.
And what this did was actually
make all the GUI apps launch
via the per session launchd.
So if we look at all the programs
running around on the system,
we have the per session
launchd here at the bottom.
It's PID 192.
It's parent PID is 34.
34, if we look at the list, is-- oh,
right above it-- it's login window.
That's our session.
And if we look at all the apps
running within the session,
this block right here,
notice that Spotlight's running as
a child of the per session launchd.
The dock is a child.
The finder's a child.
Everything running within
the session is a child.
Well, that's great.
Now it's inheriting things from launchd.
Environment variables, standard I/O,
inheritance is good.
How does this actually affect things?
Well, if we look at the list closely
and grep for the SSH agent,
we see that it's not running.
But if we talk to launchd and say,
list your jobs, we actually see that the
SSH agent is loaded into launchd.
It doesn't have a PID assigned to it yet,
because it's not running.
If we actually look at some of the
configuration details about it--
So you remember the check-in
I was talking about?
You'll get a socket back.
It's a dictionary.
In this case, it's using listeners as its
own key for its protocol.
And then it has a descriptor
that it'll get back.
But what you don't see here is that,
again, due to inheritance,
every process launched from launchd
is getting this environment variable.
In fact, we can ask launchd to export
its list of environment
variables that it's exporting.
And what do you know?
Oops.
All right, well, there's a bug.
But it did work because
terminal did get the variable.
And because we got it,
we can now say ssh add.
Oh, and probably it should
generate a key first.
And now when we say ssh add, we added it.
And if we look, it's now running.
And if we check the
parent-child relationship,
We noticed again 192.
192 was, if we scroll all the way back,
the per session launchd.
So now we can open new terminal windows,
say SSH add.
And what this means is
we can SSH to systems.
And in the case of Xcode,
which has support for CVS,
it means that when it does
a CVS check in or check out,
it can use your SSH keys now as
far as talking to your CVS server,
which some of you, I would imagine,
might actually use.
So this is a nice feature.
We'd like to actually see more processes
adopt launch on demand so they can
vend their services as they're needed.
And that is our demo.
If we can go back to the slides.
Thank you.
So this concludes our talk.
I am putting my email up here.
I can't promise that
I'll get back to you,
but I do try very hard to help
people in their questions.
Launchd is the bootstrap daemon,
so it would be in my best
interest to help bootstrap
people with their questions.
So if you need, you can try and email me.
But if that doesn't work and you find
a bug and you just want to report it,
we have a mailing list you can
send messages to and that's another
way you can get a hold of us.
Also, there's documentation in the